[Article] Complete Guide to Payload Filtering (#1145)
qdrant/landing_page: qdrant-landing/content/articles/guide-filtering.md

date: 2024-09-01T00:00:00.000Z
---

<img src="/articles_data/guide-filtering/vector-search-ecommerce.png" alt="vector-search-ecommerce" width="80%">

Imagine you sell computer hardware. To help shoppers easily find products on your website, you need to have a **user-friendly search bar**. If you’re selling computers and have extensive data on laptops, desktops, and accessories, your search feature should guide customers to the exact device they want - or a **very similar** match needed.

When storing data in Qdrant, each product is a point, consisting of an `id`, a `vector` and `payload`:

```json
{
  "id": 1, 
  "vector": [0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4],
  "payload": {
    "price": 899.99,
    "category": "laptop"
  }
}
```
The `id` is a unique identifier for the point in your collection. The `vector` is a mathematical measure of similarity to other points in the collection. 
Finally, the `payload` holds metadata that directly describes the point.

Though we may not be able to decipher the vector, we are able to derive additional information about the item from its metadata, In this specific case, **we are looking at a data point for a laptop that costs $899.99**. 

## What is filtering?

> When searching for the perfect computer, your customers may end up with results that are mathematically similar to the search entry, but not exact. For example, if they are searching for **laptops under $1000**, a simple vector search without constraints might still show laptops over $1000. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pure vector similarity doesn't always translate to relevance. When searching for the perfect computer, your customers may end up with results that are mathematically similar to the search entry, but not exact. For example, if they are searching for **laptops under $1000**, a simple vector search without constraints might still show laptops over $1000. 
```

This is why semantic search alone **may not be enough**. In order to get the exact result, you would need to enforce a payload filter on the `price`. Only then can you be sure that the search results abide by the chosen characteristic.

> This is called **filtering** and it is the most important feature of vector databases. 

Here is how a **filtered vector search** looks behind the scenes. We'll cover its mechanics in the following section.

<img src="/articles_data/guide-filtering/vector-search-filtering.png" alt="vector-search-ecommerce" width="80%">

The filtered result is a combination of the semantic search and the filtering conditions imposed upon the query.

> #### What happens if you don't use filtering?

Reviewer: I guess this section should be 'What happens if you don't use payload indexes?', since not using filtering would just return unrelevant data.

If you rely on **searching for the nearest vector**, Qdrant will have to go through the entire vector index in the collection. It will have to calculate vector similarities and against each vector and filter every payload in the collection. This can get progressively slower as your dataset grows and the compute requirement will always be increasing.

## What you will learn in this guide:

![guide-filtering-vector-search](/articles_data/guide-filtering/scanning-lens.png)

> In vector search, the processes of filtering and sorting aren't as straightforward as they are in traditional databases, where you might use SQL commands like `WHERE` and `ORDER BY`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In vector search, filtering and sorting are more interdependent than they are in traditional databases. While databases like SQL use commands such as `WHERE` and `ORDER BY`, the interplay between these processes in vector search is a bit more complex.
```

Most people use default settings and build vector search apps that aren't properly configured or even setup for precise retrieval. In this guide, we will show you how to **use filtering to get the most out of vector search** with some basic and advanced strategies that are easy to implement. 

- With filtering, you can **dramatically increase search precision**. 
- You can use filtering for resource control and **reduce compute use**. 

The easiest way to reach that "Hello World" moment is to **try filtering in a live cluster**. Our [**Cloud Quickstart**](/documentation/quickstart-cloud/) tutorial will show you how to create a cluster, add data and try some filtering clauses. 

**Qdrant's Web UI dashboard** can helps you visualize all of the exercises in this guide: 

![qdrant-filtering-tutorial](/articles_data/guide-filtering/qdrant-filtering-tutorial.png)

> ## Qdrant's innovative filtering technology

Reviewer 2: Too cheesy

Let's take a look at this **3-stage diagram**. In this case, we are trying to find the nearest neighbour to the query vector **(green)**. Your search journey starts at the bottom **(orange)**.

By default, Qdrant connects all your data points within the [**vector index**](/documentation/concepts/indexing/). After you [**introduce filters**](/documentation/concepts/filtering/), some data points become disconnected. Vector search can't cross the grayed out area and it won't reach the nearest neighbor. 
How can we bridge this gap? 

> ![filterable-vector-index](/articles_data/guide-filtering/filterable-vector-index.png)

Reviewer: replace for new image

> [**Filterable vector index**](/documentation/concepts/indexing/): This innovative technology builds additional links **(orange)** between leftover data points. The filtered points which stay behind are now traversible once again. Qdrant uses special category-based methods to connect these data points. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[**Filterable vector index**](/documentation/concepts/indexing/): This technique builds additional links **(orange)** between leftover data points. The filtered points which stay behind are now traversible once again. Qdrant uses special category-based methods to connect these data points. 
```

### Qdrant's approach vs traditional filtering methods

![stepping-lens](/articles_data/guide-filtering/stepping-lens.png)

The filterable vector index is Qdrant's solves pre and post-filtering problems by adding specialized links to the search graph. It aims to maintain the speed advantages of vector search while allowing for precise filtering, addressing the inefficiencies that can occur when applying filters after the vector search.

#### Pre-filtering reduces your search options
In pre-filtering, a search engine first narrows down the dataset based on chosen metadata values, and then searches within that filtered subset. This reduces unnecessary computation over a dataset that is potentially much larger.

> > If the filters are too restrictive, you might exclude potentially relevant results too early in the process. When the semantic search process begins, it won’t be able to retrieve the pre-excluded data points. 

Reviewer: This relates to scenarios where the most relevant data point might not meet all filter conditions but could still be a strong match. If this scenario isn't relevant, we can disregard it.

> > If the filters are too restrictive, you might exclude potentially relevant results too early in the process. When the semantic search process begins, it won’t be able to retrieve the pre-excluded data points. 

Reviewer 2: Agree with @coszio on this. It doesn't matter how strong semantic similarity is, filter will and should exclude it.

> > If the filters are too restrictive, you might exclude potentially relevant results too early in the process. When the semantic search process begins, it won’t be able to retrieve the pre-excluded data points. 

Reviewer 2: Traditionally, the problem with pre-filtering is that we can't use HNSW with it (if we don't have extended links)
So we end up with brute-force, which is expensive.

**Figure 1:** We start with five products with different prices. First, the $1000 price **filter** is applied, narrowing down the selection of laptops. Then, a vector search finds the relevant **results** within this filtered set. Unfortunately, one result is missed. 

![pre-filtering-vector-search](/articles_data/guide-filtering/pre-filtering.png)

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![pre-filtering-vector-search](/articles_data/guide-filtering/filtering-vector-search.png)
```

| **Match Any**         | Match multiple values.                   | **Datetime Range**    | Filter by date range.                    |
| **Match Except**      | Exclude specific values.                 | **UUID Match**        | Filter by unique ID.                     |
| **Nested Key**        | Filter by nested data.                   | **Geo**               | Filter by location.                      |
| **Nested Object**     | Filter by nested objects.                | **Values Count**      | Filter by element count.                 |
| **Full Text Match**   | Search in text fields.                   | **Is Empty**          | Filter empty fields.                     |
| **Has ID**            | Filter by unique ID.                     | **Is Null**           | Filter null values.                      |

#### Filtering clauses to remember

| **Clause**          | **Description**                                       | **Clause**          | **Description**                                       |
|---------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|---------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|

> | **Must**            | Includes items that meet the condition. | **Should**          | Filters if at least one condition is met (similar to **OR**). |

Reviewer 3: Add relation with AND

### Scrolling instead of searching

In Qdrant, scrolling is used to iteratively retrieve large sets of points from a collection. It is particularly useful when you’re dealing with a large number of points and don’t want to load them all at once. Instead, Qdrant provides a way to scroll through the points in chunks or batches.

You start by sending a scroll request to Qdrant with specific conditions like filtering by payload, vector search, or other criteria.

```http
POST /collections/{collection_name}/points/scroll
{
    "filter": {
        "must": [
            {
                "key": "color",
                "match": {
                    "value": "red"
                }
            }
        ]
    },
    "limit": 1,
    "with_payload": true,
    "with_vector": false
}
```
The response contains a batch of points that match the criteria and a reference (offset or next page token) to retrieve the next set of points.

Scrolling is designed to be efficient, especially when working with large datasets, because it minimizes the load on the server and reduces memory consumption on the client side by returning only manageable chunks of data at a time.

> ## Filtering with the payload index

Reviewer 3: This section is too late in the document (my impression), and these indices are needed for hnsw construction. Maybe we should put this right after the Basic Filtering Example section
